--- PAGE 1 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 305  3. Cloud Computing And Virtualization Technology Track   
 
Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT2010P  Cloud Computing Fundamentals 
 4 0 0 4 
Total Units to be Covered: 06 Total Contact Hours: 60 
Prerequisite(s ): Computer Organization and Architecture,  Operating 
System,   Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. To develop a strong foundation in virtualization and cloud computing, including 
their key concepts, principles, benefits, and distinguishing characteristics. 
2. To critically evaluate the role of Hypervisors in virtualization and compare and 
contrast different types of virtualization, such as server, storage, and network 
virtualization, highlighting their unique features and use cases. 
3. To analyze the diverse deployment and delivery models in cloud computing, 
assessing their advantages, disadvantages, and suitability for various scenarios, 
enabling informed decision-making for cloud adoption. 
4. To assess and analyze different types of cloud workloads, considering their specific 
characteristics and suitability for cloud environments.  
 
Course Outcomes 
CO1. Understand the fundamental concepts and principles of virtualization and cloud 
computing, including their benefits and characteristics.  
CO2. Evaluate the role of Hypervisors in virtualization and compare different types of 
virtualization, such as server, storage, and network virtualization. 
CO3. Analyze the various deployment and delivery models in cloud computing and 
assess their advantages, disadvantages, and suitability for different scenarios.  
CO4. Assess and analyze different types of cloud workloads considering their 
characteristics and suitability for cloud environments.  
 
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 

--- PAGE 2 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 306  Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 1 - 3 
CO 2 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 1 - 3 
CO 3 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 1 - 3 
CO4 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 1 - 3 
Average  1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 1 - 3 
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
 
Syllabus 
 
 
Unit I: Introduction to Virtualization                                      10 Lecture Hours 
Traditional IT Infrastructures, Shortcomings of physical infrastructures, Benefits and 
characteristics of Virtualization, Comparison of traditional IT infrastructures with 
virtualized infrastructures, Implementing Virtualization, Triggers for virtualization, 
Preparation for virtualization: Server selection, Server sizing, Server criticality, 
Provisioning, Proximity and Locality, Transition tools for virtualization, Cost Savings, 
A typical hardware/software server stack, Logical Equivalence, Pre and Post 
Virtualization Server Stacks, Types of Virtualization:  Area and technology based 
classification, History of Virtualization, Time-sharing systems, IBM Mainframe 
Virtualization, IBM PowerVM Virtualization, Extending Virtualization to x86, Hardware 
support for x86 Virtualization, Impact of Virtualization: Cost Impact, Manageability 
Impact (CAPEX and OPEX). 
 
Unit II: Server and Storage Virtualization                 10 Lecture Hours 
Types of Server Virtualization:  Process Level and system Level, Process Level: 
Emulation, High-Level VM, Multiprogramming, System Level: Hardware assisted 
Virtualization, Full Virtualization, Para Virtualization, Partial virtualization, Hybrid 
Virtualization; Simulation 

--- PAGE 3 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 307   
Hypervisors:  Machine Reference model,  Ring levels on x86 processors, Types of 
Hypervisors: Type 1 and Type II, Hypervisor modules, Goldberg  
 
Other Types of Virtualization: Storage Virtualization, its benefits and types: Host level 
storage virtualization, Host based mirroring, Storage level virtualization, Network 
based storage Virtualization; Desktop Virtualization: its working, benefits, constraints 
and types, Application Server Virtualization 
 
Case Studies : Xen Hypervisor, Vmware and Microsoft Hyper-V 
 
Unit III: Network and Application Virtualization   8 Lecture Hours 
Network Virtualization: Network virtualization overview, Virtual Private Network (VPN): 
VPN working, VPN types; Virtual LAN (VLAN), Advantages of VLAN 
  
Operating System Level Virtualization: Programming language-level virtualization, 
Application-level virtualization.  Application virtualization overview: Challenges in 
using applications in traditional install, use and update model, Solution for challenges, 
Architecture, Benefits of application virtualization. Containerization: application 
Containerization, Benefits, types, virtualization vs containerization 
 
Unit IV: Introduction to Cloud Computing    12 Lecture Hours  
Distributed vs Parallel computing, Elements of parallel and distributed computing, 
Approaches to parallel computing, Levels of parallelism. 
 
Cloud Computing:   Virtualization and Cloud, overlapping of virtualization and cloud, 
Areas and relative savings, Cloud definitions, Vision of cloud computing, Cloud 
computing value: Business and technological value, Market view point, Changes for 
provider, Cloud and end user, Advantages and Disadvantages of cloud computing 
model. Distributed computing: Client server, Peer to Peer, Grid vs cloud, Cluster vs 
cloud. 
Central ideas to cloud computing: Web 2.0, Utility Computing, Service Oriented 
Architecture, Service level Agreements Characteristics of Cloud Computing: 
Scalability and Elasticity, Availability and Reliability, Manageability and 
Interoperability, Performance & Optimization, Accessibility and Portability, Cloud Open 
challenges. Anatomy of a cloud: Cloud components, Cloud computing solution 
components, Service Catalog, User self-service portal, Service request management, 
Provisioning, Optimized infrastructure, Chargeback 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 308  Unit V: Cloud Computing Service and Deployment Models   12 Lecture Hours 
Cloud Service Models : Infrastructure as a service (IaaS), Platform as a service (PaaS), 
Software as a service (SaaS),  Pure IaaS, Pure PaaS and Pure SaaS, IaaS: IaaS 
features, Examples, Layers: Physical Infrastructure Layer, Infrastructure Management 
Software, Web Based Management Interface, Cases where IaaS suitable or not 
suitable,PaaS: PaaS features, Examples, Layers: Physical Infrastructure Layer, PaaS 
Core Middleware, Web Based Management Interface, Cases where PaaS suitable or 
not suitable, SaaS: SaaS features, Examples, Cases where IaaS suitable or not 
suitable 
Case Studies : AWS EC2, Salesforce and Social Media 
 
Cloud Deployment Models: Private cloud, Public cloud, Hybrid cloud, Community 
Cloud, Pros and cons of each deployment model, Cloud deployment decision factors, 
Time to deploy, 
Public cloud: Examples, Important points about public cloud, Factor Matrix, Public 
cloud advantages, Public cloud disadvantages, Private cloud  Scenario, Key 
observations from scenario, Factor matrix, Private cloud advantages, Private cloud 
disadvantages, Hybrid cloud scenarios-Observations from Hybrid scenario, Factor 
Matrix, Hybrid cloud advantages, Hybrid cloud disadvantages 
Multi cloud: Value and benefits of multicloud, Multicloud management  
 
Unit VI: Cloud Workloads                                8 Lecture Hours 
Cloud Workloads Overview, Workload characterization, Factors that influence cloud 
workload, Workloads analysis hierarchy for cloud suitability considering deployment 
models, Types of workloads: Scientific data intensive workloads, Business and 
Consumer Applications, Productivity, Social Networking, Media application, 
Multiplayer Online Gaming.  
 
Total lecture Hours 60 
Textbooks 
McGraw Hill Education, 2017.  
 
Reference Books 
1. 
 
2. Kailash Jayaswal, Jagannath Kallakurchi, Donald J. Houde, Dr. Deven Shah, and 
2014. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 309  Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme 
Components IA MID SEM End Sem Total 
Weightage (%)  50  20 30 100 
 
Detailed breakup of Internal Assessment 
Internal Assessment 
Component  Weightage in calculation of Internal 
Assessment (100 marks)  
Quiz 1 15% 
Quiz 2 15% 
Class Test 1 15% 
Class Test 2 15% 
Assignment 1/Project 20% 
Assignment 2/Project 20% 
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- PAGE 6 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 310  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT2109P  Cloud Computing Fundamentals Lab 0 0 2 1 
Total Units to be Covered: 12 Total Contact Hours: 30 
Prerequisite(s ): Computer System Architecture,  Operating System  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. To equip students with the practical skills necessary for creating and managing 
virtual machines (VMs) across diverse virtualization platforms, enabling effective 
infrastructure deployment. 
2. To empower students to apply their knowledge of virtualization and cloud 
computing in real-world scenarios, demonstrating their ability to leverage cloud 
technologies for developing applications on public cloud platforms  
3. To foster proficiency in implementing server and storage virtualization on public 
cloud platforms, enabling students to optimize resource utilization and drive 
scalable infrastructure solutions through analysis and evaluation. 
 
Course Outcomes 
CO1: Demonstrate proficiency in creating and managing virtual machines (VMs) using 
various virtualization platforms. 
CO2: Apply their knowledge of virtualization and cloud computing to develop an 
application using public cloud, showcasing their ability to leverage cloud technologies. 
CO3: Exhibit proficiency in implementing server and storage virtualization on public 
cloud platforms. 
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 1 - - - 2 - - - - - - - - - 3 
CO 2 1 - - - 2 - - - - - - - - - 3 
CO 3 1 - - - 2 - - - - - - - - - 3 
Average  1 - - - 2 - - - - - - - - - 3 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 311   
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
List of Experiments 
Experiment No. 1 :  Install and configure hosted hypervisor (Type II): Oracle VM 
VirtualBox 
Experiment No. 2:   Create a Window 7 and Ubuntu VM over Oracle VM VirtualBox 
Experiment No. 3:   Install and configure bare metal hypervisor (Type I): VMware 
ESXI 
Experiment No. 4:  Creating a virtual machine using QEMU/KVM on Ubuntu. 
Experiment No. 5:  Creating a virtual machine using QEMU/KVM on CentOS. 
Experiment No. 6 : A brief introduction to AWS. 
Experiment No. 7:  Introduction to AWS EC2 instance and create an EC2 instance. 
Experiment No. 8:  Attaching an EBS Volume to EC2 instance. 
Experiment No. 9:  Create a S3 bucket and upload an object in it. 
Experiment No. 10:  Launch Linux EC2 instance through AWS CLI 
Experiment No. 11:  Connect S3 bucket with an EC2 instance. 
Experiment No. 12:  Run a Serverless "Hello, World!" with AWS Lambda. 
 
 
Total Lab hours 30  
Textbooks 
1. -On Guide to the 
 
2. 
Education, 2017. 
 
Reference Books 
1. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 312  2. Kailash Jayaswal, Jagannath Kallakurchi, Donald J. Houde, Dr. Deven Shah, 
Press, 2014. 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme:  Continuous Assessment 
Components  Quiz & Viva  Performance & Lab Report  
Weightage (%)  50 %  50 %  
 
 
  

--- PAGE 9 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 313  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT3029P  Cloud Computing Architecture and Deployment 
Models 4 0 0 4 
Total Units to be Covered: 05 Total Contact Hours: 60 
Prerequisite(s ): Cloud Computing Fundamentals  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. To understand the characteristics, benefits, and limitations of cloud service models 
(IaaS, PaaS, SaaS) and evaluate their suitability for different organizational needs. 
2. To examine the deployment models (public, private, hybrid) of cloud computing 
and analyze their advantages, limitations, and considerations for effective cloud 
infrastructure implementation. 
3. To explore cloud computing reference architectures NIST, IBM & AWS and gain a 
comprehensive understanding of their objectives, components, and control 
mechanisms for designing robust cloud solutions. 
4. To analyze and evaluate fundamental and advanced cloud architectures, including 
workload distribution, scalability, resource pooling, and redundancy, to design 
optimized cloud environments. 
 
Course Outcomes 
On completion of this course, the students will be able to 
CO1: Analyze and compare the key characteristics, benefits, and limitations of IaaS, 
PaaS, and SaaS cloud service models to effectively assess their suitability for different 
organizational needs. 
CO2: Analyze and assess the cloud deployment models (Public, Private, Hybrid) 
demonstrating a deep understanding of their advantages, limitations, and challenges 
to make informed decisions regarding the selection and management. 
CO3: Analyze and evaluate NIST, IBM's and AWS cloud computing reference 
architectures to make informed decisions about their adoption and implementation in 
diverse usage scenarios. 
CO4: Ability to apply fundamental as well as advanced cloud computing architectures 
in various business scenarios. 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 314  CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 1 1 - 1 2 - - - - - - - 1 1 3 
CO 2 1 1 - 1 2 - - - - - - - 1 1 3 
CO 3 1 1 - 1 2 - - - - - - - 1 1 3 
CO4 1 1 - 1 2 - - - - - - - 1 1 3 
Average  1 1 - 1 2 - - - - - - - 1 1 3 
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
 
Syllabus 
 
 
Unit I: Service Models (IaaS, PaaS and SaaS)       13 Lecture Hours 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): Characteristics of IaaS, Comparing ISPs and IaaS, 
IaaS case studies, IaaS enabling technology, the trusted cloud, IaaS as the best/not 
best option, PaaS: Platform as a Service. 
Platform as a Service: PaaS characteristics, Integrated lifecycle platforms, Anchored 
lifecycle platforms, Enabling technologies as a platform, Case studies: Integrated 
lifecycle platform, PaaS as the best/ not best option. 
approach, Characteristics of Software as a Service (SaaS), SaaS economics and the 
ecosystem, Types of SaaS platforms, SaaS: Providers, Collaboration as a service, 
Enabling and management tools as a service, Monitoring and management tools as a 
service, SaaS as the best/not best option. 
 
Unit II: Deployment Models (Pubic, Private, Hybrid)               12 Lecture Hours 
Private Cloud Deployment: Private Cloud, Illustration of Private Cloud, Advantages of 
Private Cloud, Limitations of Private Cloud, Service Management, Journey into Private 
Cloud, Planning and Strategy, Standardization, Virtualization, Automation, Cloud, 
Case study  VMware vCloud, Case Study  IBM SmartCloud Entry, Private cloud.  
 
Public Cloud Deployment:: Public Cloud, Illustration of Public Cloud, Why Public 
Cloud, Advantages of Public Cloud, Limitations of Public Cloud: Low degree of security 
and control, Lack of control on infrastructure, Configuration, Network latency and 

--- PAGE 11 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 315  accessibility concerns, Highest long term cost; Public v/s Private: Journey into Public 
Cloud, Revisit the idea of adopting public cloud: Cloud vendor selection, migrating to 
Cloud, Cloud vendor selection, SLA  Service Level Agreements, 
Credits/Compensation terms, Credit process, Disaster recovery plan, Exclusions, 
Security and Privacy, Periodic upgrade and maintenance, Data location and 
Jurisdiction, Pricing and Measurability, Interoperability and Lock-in, Exit 
process/Termination policies, Proven track record; Public cloud vendors and Case 
studies: AWS, Microsoft Azure, Google GCP 
Hybrid Cloud deployment: Hybrid Cloud, Why Hybrid Cloud, Illustration of Hybrid 
Cloud, Advantages of Hybrid Cloud, Challenges of Hybrid Cloud, Develop and 
manage hybrid workloads, Developing applications for hybrid cloud, Develop 
applications using PaaS, Managing hybrid workloads, Journey into Hybrid Cloud 
 
OpenStack: Introduction, OpenStack Architecture, IBM SoftLayer, IBM Bluemix -
Benefits of IBM Bluemix, -More Bluemix features, -Bluemix architecture. 
 
 
Unit III: Cloud Computing Reference Architectures (NIST & IBM)   10 Lecture 
Hours 
NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture (CCRA): Objectives of NIST, The 
conceptual reference model, Example: Usage scenarios, Cloud consumer, Cloud 
provider, Cloud auditor, Cloud broker, Cloud carrier, Scope of control between 
provider and consumer, CCRA: Architectural components, Service orchestration, 
Cloud service management, Business support, Provisioning and configuration 
Portability and interoperability, Security, Privacy, Cloud taxonomy. 
 
Cloud services, Infrastructure, Common Cloud Management Platform (CCMP), CCMP 
supports any level of virtualization, Business Support Services (BSS), Operational 
Support Services (OSS), Security, resilience, performance and consumption, Cloud 
service creator: Service development tools, IBM CCRA versions or CCRA evolution, 
Adoption patterns, Adoption pattern in CCRA 3.0, Examples of cloud services. 
 
Unit IV: Fundamental and Advanced Cloud Architectures      15 Lecture Hours 
Fundamental Cloud Architectures: Workload distribution architecture,  Resource 
pooling architecture, Dynamic scalability architecture, Elastic resource capacity 
architecture, Service load balancing architecture, Cloud bursting architecture, Elastic 
disk provisioning architecture, Redundant storage architecture.     
 
Advanced Cloud Architectures: Overview of the advanced cloud architecture, 
Hypervisor clustering architecture, Load balanced virtual server instances 
architecture, Non-disruptive service relocation architecture, Zero downtime 
architecture, Cloud balancing architecture, Resource reservation architecture, 
Dynamic failure detection and recovery, Bare-metal provisioning architecture, Rapid 
provisioning architecture, Components that can comprise the system, Automated 
administration pattern, Storage workload management architecture, Live VM 
migration. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 316  Unit V: Cloud Computing Reference Architecture (CCRA)  AWS  10 Lecture 
Hours 
What is amazon web services, Features of AWS, Web application hosting, Content 
and media serving, Large scale computing and huge data sets, Disaster recovery for 
local applications, Media sharing, Financial service grids, Time series data processing, 
Backup and restore to VMware cloud on AWS, Pilot light on VMware cloud on AWS, 
Microsoft share point on VMware cloud on AWS, Hybrid active directory trusted 
domain, Hybrid active directory stretched domain, Oracle RAC on VMware cloud on 
AWS, Batch processing, Advertisement serving, Asynchronous online gaming, 
Ecommerce website: Web frontend, Ecommerce website: Checkout service, 
Marketing and recommendations, Fault tolerance and high availability, File 
synchronization service, Amazon services, Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3), 
Amazon services developer tools, Amazon services developer tools, Amazon services 
security, identity and compliance, Amazon service applications. 
 
 
Total lecture Hours 60 
Textbooks 
1. Cloud Computing Architecture (IBM ICE Publication) 
2. Cloud Computing Deployment Model (IBM ICE Publication)  
3. Cloud Computing For Dummies Judith Hurwitz, Robin Bloor, Marcia Kaufman, 
Fern Halper, For Dummies, Edition 1, Nov 2009. 
4. Cloud Computing: Concepts, Technology & Architecture, Thomas Erl,Pearson 
Education India, Jan 2014 
5. OpenStack Essentials, Dan Radez, PackIT publication, publications , 2nd Edition, 
Jan 2016 
 
Reference Books 
1. 
 
2. Gautam 
 
3. Kalyn Sehrt
 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 317  Examination Scheme 
Components IA MID SEM End Sem Total 
Weightage (%)  50  20 30 100 
 
 
Detailed breakup of Internal Assessment 
Internal Assessment 
Component  Weightage in calculation of Internal 
Assessment (100 marks)  
Quiz 1 15% 
Quiz 2 15% 
Class Test 1 15% 
Class Test 2 15% 
Assignment 1/Project 20% 
Assignment 2/Project 20% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 318  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT3129P  Cloud Computing Architecture and Deployment 
Models Lab 0 0 2 1 
Total Units to be Covered: 12 Total Contact Hours: 30 
Prerequisite(s ): Cloud Computing Fundamentals  and  Cloud 
Computing Fundamentals  Lab  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. To develop a comprehensive understanding of cloud computing architecture and 
deployment models  
2. To gain practical experience in creating and managing infrastructure on cloud 
platforms, configuring and developing platforms as a service, and utilizing software 
as a service (SaaS) solutions with the help of various tools and technologies. 
3. To develop practical skills in OpenStack by successfully installing and deploying 
virtual machines, exploring the components of OpenStack and its components. 
 
Course Outcomes 
At the end of this course student should be able to  
CO1: Demonstrate proficiency in creating and managing virtual machine instances on 
cloud platforms (AWS EC2, Azure, and GCP) and establishing secure connections to 
them using appropriate key pairs and protocols. 
CO2: Demonstrate advanced proficiency in AWS cloud management techniques like 
storage management, server less computing, auto scaling, load balancing and identity 
and access management for enhanced security and efficient resource utilization. 
CO3: Demonstrate proficient hands-on skills in OpenStack by installing, deploying, 
and managing virtual machines using Nova, Cinder, Glance, and Keystone 
components, and utilize the monitoring tool Nagios to monitor and assess cloud 
environment parameters effectively. 
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 

--- PAGE 15 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 319  CO 1 1 - - 1 2 - - 1 1 - - 1 - - 3 
CO 2 1 - - 1 2 - - 1 1 - - 1 - - 3 
CO 3 1 - - 1 2 - - 1 1 - - 1 - - 3 
Average  1 - - 1 2 - - 1 1 - - 1 - - 3 
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
 
List of Experiments 
Experiment-1: AWS EC2 (IaaS)  
1.1. Creation of Windows instance on AWS EC2 and connecting to it through RDP 
client and .pem key pair. 
1.2 Creation of Linux Instance on AWS EC2 and connecting it to through .ppk 
keypair using PuTTY. 
 
Experiment-2: Azure & GCP (IaaS)  
2.1. Create Windows and Ubuntu machine Virtual Machine in Azure and connect to 
it. 
2.2. Create a Windows Virtual machine instance in GCP and connect to it. 
 
Experiment-3: AWS Autoscaling and Load Balancers (IaaS)  
3.1. Autoscaling can be performed on EC2 instances (Scale manually & Scale on 
demand) 
3.2. Use Application Load Balancer in AWS 
 
Experiment-4: AWS Storage (IaaS)  
4.1.   EBS Volume creation and attaching it to EC2 instance  (Windows as well as 
Linux instances) 
4.2. Creating a S3 bucket 
 
Experiment-5: AWS Storage (IaaS)  
5.1 Changing S3 bucket access permissions, applying replication and lifecycle rules. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 320  5.2. Host a static website on S3  
 
Experiment-6: Identity and Access Management /Security in AWS Cloud 
Environment  
6.1. Create user, role and policies and access it through Management console and 
CLI. 
6.2. Show how to use MFA in IAM 
6.3. Adding a WAF to a Web application & its Load balancer and blocking access 
 
Experiment-7: Serverless Computing (AWS Lambda)  
7.1. Creating, starting and stopping EC2 instances using AWS Lambda.  
 
Experiment-8: AWS ElasticBeanstalk (PaaS)  
8.1 Create and manage a LAMP stack using Amazon EC2 Instance and host an html 
file on it (Iaas+PaaS). 
8.1. Deploy an application on Elastic Beanstalk 
 
Experiment-9: Openstack Installation and VM deployment 
9.1. Learn Hands-on OpenStack Installation: Install OpenStack on single node using 
Packstack 
9.2. Familiarize with OpenStack dashboard  Horizon: Go through each and every 
component of the dashboard and understand the meaning of the sections and 
components therein 
9.3. Deploy a virtual machine instance [using OpenStack Nova]: Create, Deploy, Test 
and Destroy a VM instance using OpenStack Nova component via Horizon 
 
Experiment-10: Openstack  
10.1. Deploy a Linux VM from an ISO image [OpenStack  Nova, Cinder and Glance]: 
Create an image in OpenStack Glance, Create a VM with a volume and deploy the 
image 
10.2. Deploy a VM from an image snapshot [OpenStack  Nova, Cinder and Glance]: 
Create a VM, take a snapshot of the VM and store the VM image in Glance and create 
a new VM image in Nova from the created snapshot 

--- PAGE 17 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 321  10.3. User and Project Management [OpenStack  Horizon advanced, Keystone]: 
Explore PM functions in OpenStack and try basic settings 
 
Experiment-11: Openstack and components 
11.1. Common cloud management tasks [OpenStack  Horizon, Keystone] 
Work with quotas in a Project  assign, increase, decrease quotas for compute and 
storage 
11.2. Adding a new compute node [OpenStack  Nova advanced] 
Add a new compute note in Nova and create VMs on the new new node 
 
Experiment-12: Overview of Nagios   
12.1 Explore monitoring tool Nagios and check the parameters it can monitor 
 
 
Total Lab hours 30  
Textbooks 
1. IBM Material Cloud Deployment Model Lab  
2. 
Published, 2020. 
3. 
rd Edition, Packt, 2015. 
 
Reference Books 
1. John Culkin, and Mike Zazon,  1st Edition, O'Reilly Media, 2021. 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme:  Continuous Assessment 
Components  Quiz & Viva  Performance & Lab Report  
Weightage (%)  50 %  50 %  
 
  

--- PAGE 18 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 322  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSDV3018P  Containerization and DevOps 4 0 0 4 
Total Units to be Covered: 06 Total Contact Hours: 60 
Prerequisite(s ): Cloud Computing Fundamentals, Cloud Computing 
Architecture and Deployment Models  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
The objective of this course are 
1. To understand Containerization with Docker, emphasizing automation and 
orchestration. 
2. To master DevOps fundamentals for collaborative and automated software delivery. 
3. To gain practical knowledge of DevOps applications in real-world scenarios. 
4. To explore DevOps principles, lifecycles, and essential tools for efficient software 
development and deployment. 
 
Course Outcomes 
On completion of this course, the students will be able to 
CO1: Comprehensive understanding of containerization and the principles of DevOps. 
CO2: Apply Docker fundamentals by creating and managing Docker containers, 
demonstrating comprehension and application of containerization concepts. 
CO3: Demonstrate a deep understanding of container orchestration and apply it 
practically by creating and managing services using container orchestration platforms. 
CO4: Assess DevOps adoption strategies, analyze its impact on business, and 
synthesize cross-functional team dynamics and tool selection within the DevOps 
context. 
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 - 1 - - 2 - - - - - - 1 - - 3 
CO 2 - 1 - - 2 - - - - - - 1 2 1 3 
CO 3 - 1 - - 2 - - - - - - 1 2 1 3 

--- PAGE 19 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 323  CO4 - 1 - - 2 - - - - - - 1 1 1 3 
Average  - 1 0.75 - 2 - - - - - - 1 1.25 0.75 3 
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
 
Syllabus 
 
 
Unit I: Introduction to Containerization and DevOps                   8 Lecture Hours 
Virtualization and its types-Server Virtualization, Operating System Virtualization 
Containers & DevOps: Introduction to Containers, Understanding DevOps Principles 
and Practices, Benefits of Containerization in DevOps, Docker vs. Virtualization, 
Different vendors for containers in the market,  
Docker: 
Docker editions, Installation of the Docker engine,  Docker terminology, Docker 
community, Docker community edition, Docker enterprise edition, Build Kit features, 
Docker compose, Docker architecture-Docker host, Docker Daemon, Docker Hub, 
Docker API, Docker Objects, Docker and DevOps tools 
Software Designing Architectural Approaches:  Server based and Serverless 
architecture-Monolithic, Service Oriented Architecture, Microservices, Comparison of 
different architectural approaches, Docker and Microservices-apart and together  
 
Unit II: Docker Fundamentals                               12 Lecture Hours 
Basic Commands : Docker container Lifecycle commands, Docker desktop , 
Checking docker version, Running your first NGINX application, Docker repository, 
Docker tags, Docker TAG examples, Docker TAG scenario, Tagging scheme, Docker 
images, Layers, Docker file, Docker file instructions, Managing containers and images, 
Creating Docker Images, Dockerfile Best Practices, Pushing Images to Docker Hub, 
Running your own Docker container.h 

--- PAGE 20 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 324  Data Management in Docker:  Persisting data in docker, Approaches: Volumes, bind 
mount, Differences, Volumes-creation, listing, --mount flag, -v flag, removing, 
inspecting bind mount- creation, --mount flag, -v flag, removing, tmpfs mount, Use 
case scenarios volumes, bind mount and tmpfs mount. 
Networking in Docker:  Networking in Docker, Docker network drivers- bridge, host, 
overlay 
ipvlan, macvlan, Publishing ports, IP address and host name, DNS services, Network 
Drivers use case summary, creating and removing a user-defined bridge, managing a 
user-defined bridge- connect a container to a user defined bridge, Disconnect a 
container from a user-defined bridge, Connect a container to the default bridge 
network. 
Continuous Integration : Docker as a build environment, GitHub Actions, Building 
CI/CD Pipleine using Git Hub actions. 
 
Unit III: Automation and Orchestration        12 Lecture Hours 
Container Orchestration need and Overview: Key concepts in orchestration, 
popular orchestra platforms: Swarm Docker, Kubernetes, Apache mesos 
Docker Compose: Features, use cases, history and using Docker Compose  
Docker Swarm: Feature highlights, Swarm mode key concepts-swarm, nodes, 
services & tasks, load balancing; Create a swarm, Add nodes to swarm, Deploy a 
service, Inspect the service, Scale the service, Delete the service, Apply rolling 
updates, Drain a node, Use swarm mode routing mesh 
Kubernetes: Overview, Traditional deployment era, virtualized deployment era , 
container deployment era, Need of Kubernetes, what Kubernetes is not?, Kubernetes 
components: control plane components, Node components, Addons, Kubernetes API, 
Cluster Architecture-Nodes, Communication between nodes and the control Plane, 
Controllers, Leases, Cloud Controller Manager, Container runtime Interface, Garbage 
Collection, Containers: Images, Container Environment, Runtime class, Container 
Lifecycle hooks, Workloads- Pods and Workload Resources, Services, Load 
balancing and Networking, Storage, Configuration, Policies and security 
Case Study:  Docker Swarm vs Kubernetes 
Case Study: Amazon ECS and EKS services  
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 325  Unit IV: DevOps: Principles and Practices                                     8 Lecture Hours 
Overview, Working, Benefits, DevOps history, DevOps principles and lifecycle, 
DevOps practice, DevOps adoption: Deming, lean manufacturing, and Kaizen, Lean 
manufacturing, Lean standards of manufacturing, DevOps: IBM view, Four DevOps 
adoption paths- Steer adoption path, Develop and test adoption path, Collaborative 
development, Continuous testing, Way to deployment, Continuous customer feedback 
and optimization,  
DevOps architecture and resilience, Cloud resiliency, DevOps resiliency, Four stages 
of the resilience process-Detect, DevOps style; Alert with a cloud and DevOps 
mindset; Respond & recover using automation and appropriate failover strategy; 
Refine & test, achieving incremental improvements 
 
Unit V: DevOps Adoption and Business Patterns           8 Lecture Hours 
Business needs for DevOps , DevOps teams and cross functioning of teams, Silos in 
the world of software development and their role in project delivery, DevOps teams 
and cross functioning of teams, Application team v/s. Platform team, System admins 
and other stakeholders, Continuous integration vs continuous deployment vs 
continuous delivery, DevOps tools- Continuous development, Continuous integration, 
Continuous Testing, Continuous Deployment, Continuous Monitoring, Lean Thinking 
and Methods  Kaizen, Agile Vs DevOps, DevOps impact on developers, DevOps 
impact on operations, Successful DevOps adoption, Challenges of DevOps adoption, 
Introduction to Kanban, Types of kanban board, create a kanban board, Kanban with 
IBM tools. Scrum application delivery pipeline and support team, an orchestration 
framework for continuous delivery, Software release plan, Feedback and learning from 
feedback and improving the delivery, DevOps toolchain, DevSecOps, DevOps vs 
SRE. Select the right tool for DevOps: Docker, Kubernetes, Puppet, Ansible, Other 
tools, DevOps monitoring tools, Version control, and code repository 
 
Unit VI: DevOps Tools                                                                    12 Lecture Hours 
Version Control Tools: GitHub-GitLab-BitBucket, GitHub-CLI, Desktop, Branches, 
forks, and Pull requests, Repositories, GitHub actions, GitHub packages, Webhooks, 
API 

--- PAGE 22 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 326  Continuous Integration Tools:  Jenkins, TravisCI, Jenkins- Introduction to Jenkins, 
Jenkins architecture and components: Installation and setup of Jenkins, Creating and 
Configuring Jenkins Jobs Jenkins Pipelines Source Code Management (SCM) 
Integration Building and Testing with Jenkins 
Infrastructure as Code (IaC) Tools:  Understanding IaC, Popular IaC tools-
Terraform, Ansible 
Monitoring and Logging Tools: Monitoring and logging in DevOps , Popular 
monitoring and logging tools- Prometheus, ELK stack  
Collaboration in a DevOps Team:  Popular collaboration and communication tools- 
Slack, Microsoft Teams, Integrating tools into the DevOps workflow  
Case study:  CI/CD technique.  
 
Total lecture Hours 60 
Textbooks 
1. Container Orchestration & Infrastructure Automation, IBM ICE Publications. 
2. 
Edition, Shroff Publishers, 2019. 
3. -
published, 2021. 
4. 
Wiley, 2019. 
Reference Books 
1. nd Edition , Manning 
Publications, 2019. 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
Examination Scheme 
Components IA MID SEM End Sem Total 
Weightage (%)  50  20 30 100 
 
 
Detailed breakup of Internal Assessment 

--- PAGE 23 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 327  Internal Assessment 
Component  Weightage in calculation of Internal 
Assessment (100 marks)  
Quiz 1 15% 
Quiz 2 15% 
Class Test 1 15% 
Class Test 2 15% 
Assignment 1/Project 20% 
Assignment 2/Project 20% 
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- PAGE 24 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 328   
Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSDV3118P  Containerization and DevOps Lab 0  0  2  1  
Total Units to be Covered: 12 Total Contact Hours: 30 
Prerequisite(s ): Cloud Computing Fundamentals Lab , Cloud 
Computing Architecture and Deployment Lab  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. To demonstrate on Containerization technology and use of Docker container 
automation and orchestration.  
2. To gain practical knowledge and hands-on experience on DevOps tools, their 
roles and importance in the DevOps lifecycle, including continuous integration, 
infrastructure provisioning, configuration management, and code quality analysis.  
Course Outcomes 
At the end of this course student should be able to  
CO1. Demonstrate the usage of Docker Containers.  
CO2. Demonstrate orchestration of Containers images and microservices.  
CO3. Apply DevOps tools to effectively implement DevOps practices, including 
continuous integration, infrastructure provisioning, configuration management, and 
code quality analysis.  
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 1  - - 1  2  - - 1  1  - - 1  - - 3  
CO 2 1  - - 1  2  - - 1  1  - - 1  - - 3  
CO 3 1  - - 1  2  - - 1  1  - - 1  - - 3  
Average  1  - - 1  2  - - 1  1  - - 1  - - 3  
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
List of Experiments 

--- PAGE 25 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 329   
Experiment 1:  Introduction to Dockers  
a. Setup & Running a Container  
b. Performance evaluation of Virtual box machine deployment and Dockers 
containers deployment.  
Experiment 2:  Docker Installation, configuration, Running Images  
Experiment 3:  Deploying web applications with Docker  
Experiment 4:  Dockerfile - Containerizing application, Building Images, Tagging, 
Publishing  
Experiment 5 : Docker - Volumes, Env, Monitoring (Docker stats), Docker Networks 
Experiment 6:  Docker Compose - Installation, Creating Compose files, Running 
Images using Docker-compose  
Experiment 7:  Create a CI CD pipeline for deploying web application using jenkins  
Experiment 8:  Ansible  
Experiment 9 : Chef  
Experiment 10:  Install, setup and run SonarQube for a local scan.  
Experiment 11 : Orchestration using Docker compose on multi container applications.  
Experiment 12:  Study and Analyse container orchestration using Kubernetes.  
Total Lab hours 30  
 
Text Books  
1. IBM ICE Publications  
2. The Docker Book: Containerization is the new virtualization by James Turnbull, 
Shroff Publishers, First Edition, 2019 
3. Docker: A Project-Based Approach to Learning by Jason Cannon, September 
2021 
4. DevOps Tools from Practitioner's Viewpoint, by Deepak Gaikwad, Viral Thakkar, 
Wiley, Jan 2019  

--- PAGE 26 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 330  Reference Books 
1. nd Edition , Manning 
Publications, 2019. 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme:  Continuous Assessment 
Components  Quiz & Viva  Performance & Lab Report  
Weightage (%)  50 %  50 %  
 
  

--- PAGE 27 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 331  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT4018P Cloud Application Development         4 0 0 4 
Total Units to be Covered: 05 Total Contact Hours: 60 
Prerequisite(s ): Object Oriented Programming, Python Programming, 
Cloud Computing Architecture and Deployment 
Models,  Containerization and DevOps  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. Student should be able to get solid theoretical background of high computing 
paradigms.  
2. Students get adequate conceptual understanding of cloud application development 
platform and framework.  
3. Student can explore cloud applications and identify applications suitable for 
implementation on cloud. 
 
Course Outcomes 
On completion of this course, the students will be able to 
CO1: Correlate the underlying technologies for cloud application development with 
basic programming skills  
CO2: Apply the concepts of high throughput, data intensive applications and Task 
programming 
CO3: Discover various cloud computing platforms for application development  
CO4: Analyse the use of automation in cloud application development and 
understand the real time use cases 
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 1 - 2 - - - - - - - - 1 1 2 3 
CO 2 1 1 2 - 2 - - - - - - 1 1 2 3 
CO 3 1 1 2 1 2 - - - - - - 1 1 2 3 
CO4 1 1 2 1  - - - - - - - 1 2 3 

--- PAGE 28 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 332  Average  1 0.6 2 0.5 2 - - - - - - 0.75 1 2 3 
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
 
Syllabus 
 
 
Unit I: Basics of Cloud Computing and introduction                 12 Lecture Hours 
to MapReduce programming for application development   
Business case for implementing cloud application, Requirements collection for cloud 
application development, Cloud service models and deployment models, Open 
challenges in Cloud Computing: Cloud inter-operability and standards, scalability and 
fault tolerance, security, trust and privacy, Data intensive computing: MapReduce 
programming, what is data-intensive computing? Characterizing data-intensive 
computations, Data intensive research issues, Historical perspective, The early age: 
High-speed wide area networking, The early age, Data grids, Data clouds and big 
data,  
Unit II: Understanding basic Task Programming skills            12 Lecture Hours 
and MapReduce Programming   
Understanding the basics of HTML, javascript, Client-side web scripting: DOM and 
AJAX, Server-side applications: node.js, Introduction to task programming, High-
throughput computing: Task programming, Task computing, Task-based application 
models, MPI reference scenario, MPI program structure, Workflow applications with 
task dependencies, Workflow technologies abstract model of workflow system, Cloud 
application platform task-based programming, Task programming model scenario, 
iTask and cloud application platform task, iTask interface, Wrapping an iTask into an 
cloud application platform instance, Controlling task execution, Dynamic task 
submission. Databases and data-intensive computing, Technologies for data intensive 
computing, High performance distributed file systems and storage clouds, Not only 
SQL (NoSQL) systems, Prominent implementations supporting data: Intensive 
applications, Amazon dynamo architecture, Google bigtable architecture, Apache 
Cassandra, Hadoop HBase, Programming platforms, The MapReduce programming 
model, MapReduce computation workflow, Google MapReduce infrastructure 
overview, Variations and extensions of MapReduce 
 

--- PAGE 29 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 333  Unit III: Application Development: Google and Microsoft Azure       12 Lecture 
Hours 
Accessing the clouds: Web application vs Cloud Application, Frameworks: Model View 
Controller (MVC), Struts, Spring, Maven, Gradle. Cloud platforms in Industry  Google 
AppEngine (serverless platform for build scalable web and mobile back ends in any 
programming language), Microsoft Azure, Openshift (building containerized 
applications), CloudFoundry (provides a highly efficient, modern model for cloud native 
application delivery on top of Kubernetes)  
 
Unit IV: Application Development on AWS and DevOps tools     12 Lecture 
Hours 
Best practices in architecture cloud applications in AWS cloud, Elastic Beanstalk 
(Deploy and Provision web applications), Amazon Simple Queue Service (SQS), 
RabbitMQ, Cloud applications: Amazon Simple Notification Service (Amazon SNS), 
multi-player online game hosting on cloud resources, building content delivery 
networks using clouds. Puppet and Chef  steps for automation: Introduction, files and 
packages, services and subscriptions, exec and notify, facts, conditional statements 
and logging, configuration management tools, automation, configuration orchestration 
 
Unit V: APIs for cloud application development and     12 Lecture Hours 
 real time use cases   
RESTful API Usage, RESTful API Design & Implementation, Add Functionality to 
REST API, storing objects in the Cloud, Session management, Working with third party 
APIs: Overview of interconnectivity in Cloud ecosystems. Facebook API, Twitter API, 
Google API. Use cases of cloud applications, Scientific applications, Healthcare: ECG 
analysis in the cloud, Biology: Protein structure prediction, Gene expression data 
analysis for cancer diagnosis, GeoScience : Satellite image processing, Business and 
consumer applications, SalesForce.com, Productivity, DropBox, Google Docs, 
EyeOS, Social networking : Facebook, Media applications: animoto, 3D rendering on 
private clouds, Video encoding on the cloud: Encoding.com, Multiplayer online gaming 
scalable processing of logs for network games.             
 
Total lecture Hours 60   
 
Textbooks 
3. 
 

--- PAGE 30 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 334  4. -on Application Development using Spring Boot: Building 
Modern Cloud Native Applications by Learning RESTFul API, Microservices, 
st Edition, BPB Publications, 
2021. 
 
Reference Books 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme 
Components IA MID SEM End Sem Total 
Weightage (%)  50  20 30 100 
 
Detailed breakup of Internal Assessment 
Internal Assessment 
Component  Weightage in calculation of Internal 
Assessment (100 marks)  
Quiz 1 15% 
Quiz 2 15% 
Class Test 1 15% 
Class Test 2 15% 
Assignment 1/Project 20% 
Assignment 2/Project 20% 
 
  

--- PAGE 31 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 335  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT4118P  Cloud Application Development Lab   0  0  2  1  
Total Units to be Covered: 12 Total Contact Hours: 30 
Prerequisite(s ): Object Oriented Programming, Python Programming, 
Cloud Computing architecture and Deployment 
Models, DevOps ad Containerization  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. To equip students with the skills to effectively set up a cloud application 
development platform, showcasing their ability to configure and deploy the 
necessary infrastructure and tools. 
2. To demonstrate the capability to leverage advanced computing capabilities for the 
development and deployment of cloud applications,  
3. To analyze the implementation processes and challenges involved in deploying 
cloud applications across different domains. 
 
Course Outcomes 
At the end of this course student should be able to   
CO1: Demonstrate proficiency in setting up a cloud application development platform, 
showcasing the ability to configure and deploy the necessary infrastructure and tools 
for cloud application development. 
CO2: Demonstrate ability to leverage advanced computing capabilities to develop and 
deploy cloud applications. 
CO3: Analyzing the implementation processes and criticalities involved in the 
deployment of cloud applications across various domains. 
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CO 1 1 - 2 - - - - - - - - 1 1 2 3 
CO 2 1 1 2 - 2 - - - - - - 1 1 2 3 

--- PAGE 32 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 336  CO 3 1 1 2 1 2 - - - - - - 1 1 2 3 
Average  1 0.67 2 0.33 1.33 - - - - - - 1 1 2 3 
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
  
List of Experiments 
Experiment 1:  Installation of Single Node Hadoop Cluster on Ubuntu and run simple 
program like wordcount. 
Experiment 2:  Install Google App Engine. Create Hello World App and other Simple 
Web Applications. 
Experiment 3 : Build Apps at Scale with Google App Engine. 
Experiment 4:  Setup and Configure Cloud application development platform (Like 
Amazon application development platform). 
Experiment 5:  Using cloud Platform API develop and deploy prototype application. 
Experiment 6:    Generate high volume workloads of applications on cloud platform 
Experiment 7:    Data Intensive Computing: Map-Reduce Programming implement a 
sample Map-Reduce procedure using cloud platform 
Experiment 8: Developing Message-Based Applications with RabbitMQ  
Experiment 9:  Implement data analytics for some application using cloud platform 
Experiment 10: Implement Machine Learning model/s on cloud platform like Sage 
Maker, Amazon Polly etc. 
Experiment 11: Install apache http server, enable and start the services using Chef 
Cookbook. 
Experiment 12 : Create a CI/CD pipeline using scratch for deploying application (using 
Git and Jenkins) 
 
Total Lab hours 30  

--- PAGE 33 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 337   
Textbooks 
1. Cloud Application Development Lab Manual (IBM ICE Publications) 
2.  
 
Reference Books 
2. 
 O'Reilly Media, 2011. 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme:  Continuous Assessment 
Components  Quiz & Viva  Performance & Lab Report  
Weightage (%)  50 %  50 %  
 
 
  

--- PAGE 34 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 338  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT4019P  Cloud Computing Security and Management 3 0 0 3 
Total Units to be Covered: 06 Total Contact Hours: 45 
Prerequisite(s ): Data communication and Networks , Cloud 
Computing Architecture and Deployment Models 
 Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. Develop a comprehensive understanding of cloud security fundamentals, 
2. Analyze the importance of data security in the cloud and its principles, 
3. Evaluate the role of IAM in cloud security and its components, goals, and 
principles. 
4. Apply network security fundamentals and CIA principles in cloud environments. 
5. Apply secure coding practices, including input validation, authentication, and error 
handling in cloud applications. 
Course Outcomes 
CO1: Assess the security challenges and vulnerabilities specific to cloud 
infrastructure, including physical security measures and virtualization technology 
CO2: Identify and define key data security concepts and mechanisms used to protect 
data in transit, at rest, and during processing in cloud environments. 
CO3: Implement and assess IAM components and policies in cloud environments, 
CO4: Evaluate the importance of network and application security in cloud computing, 
demonstrating an understanding of security fundamentals 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 - 1 3 
CO 2 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 - 1 3 
CO 3 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 - 1 3 
CO4 1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 - 1 3 
Average  1 - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 - 1 3 
 

--- PAGE 35 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 339   
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 
3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
Syllabus 
 
 
Unit I: Security Overview             8 Lecture Hours 
Overview of cloud security- Security Services - Confidentiality, Integrity, 
Authentication, Nonrepudiation, Access Control - Basic of cryptography - Conventional 
and public-key cryptography, hash functions, authentication, and digital signatures. 
   
 Common security risks in cloud environments, Threat modeling in the cloud, Security 
considerations for different cloud deployment models,  Cloud security: Physical 
Security, Network Security, Data Security, Identity and Access Management (IAM), 
Application Security, Virtualization Security, Operating System Security, Security 
Compliance and Governance, Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB) , Logging and 
Monitoring, Incident Response and Forensics, Encryption Key Management, Multi-
Factor Authentication (MFA), Backup and Recovery, Security Training and 
Awareness, Zero Trust Security, Shared responsibility model, Cloud Security Alliance 
 
Unit II: Infrastructure security & Virtualization Security             12 Lecture Hours 
Introduction to Physical and Infrastructure Security in the Cloud: Role of physical 
security in cloud computing, Key physical security components and objectives, Cloud 
infrastructure and data center architecture, Security challenges in shared data center 
environments, Data center architecture and design considerations, Redundancy and 
fault tolerance, Environmental controls (temperature, humidity, fire suppression), 
Physical access control and monitoring, Intrusion detection systems (IDS) and 
intrusion prevention systems (IPS), Video surveillance and access control systems, 
Visitor management and access logging, Data center personnel and roles (e.g., NOC, 
SOC), Security awareness and training for data center staff, Change management and 
incident response in data center operations, Asset management and tracking Data 
replication and backup strategies, Failover and high availability configurations, Testing 
and simulating disaster scenarios 
Virtualization security threats and vulnerabilities, Isolation and segmentation of VMs, 
VM escape attacks and mitigation, Security for containerized applications 
OS-Level Security: Hardening operating systems in the cloud, Patch management and 
vulnerability assessment, Anti-malware and intrusion detection for OS instances, OS-
level access controls and permissions Secure OS Configuration: Secure boot and 
integrity verification, Network security configurations for OS instances, Secure shell 
(SSH) and remote access security, Application and service hardening OS Security 
Best Practices: OS security baseline standards, Security updates and patch 

--- PAGE 36 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 340  management policies, Security information and event management (SIEM) 
integration, Monitoring and auditing OS-level activities 
Case Studies: VM escape attack mitigation in a cloud service provider environment, 
OS-level security in a containerized application deployment 
Unit III: Data Security                                  7 Lecture Hours 
Importance of data security in the cloud, Data security principles: CIA (Confidentiality, 
Integrity, Availability). Shared responsibility model in cloud security,  
Data Classification and Protection: Data classification and sensitivity assessment, 
Data protection requirements (e.g., PII, PHI), Data masking and anonymization, Data 
retention policies and disposal  Encryption Techniques: Encryption fundamentals, 
Data encryption at rest using disk and database encryption, Encryption in transit with 
TLS/SSL, Encryption for data during processing (homomorphic encryption) 
Compliance and Regulatory Requirements: Secure Data Sharing and Collaboration, 
Secure file sharing and collaboration tools, Secure data exchange with external 
parties, Data leakage prevention (DLP) and protection mechanisms, Implementing 
secure data sharing policies Data Security in Multi-Cloud Environments: Challenges 
and considerations for multi-cloud data security, Data replication and synchronization, 
Data governance in multi-cloud architectures, Data compliance frameworks (e.g., 
GDPR, HIPAA), Auditing and monitoring for compliance, Cloud provider compliance 
certifications, Privacy and data protection in the cloud 
 
Unit IV: Network Security               7 Lecture Hours 
Importance of network security in the cloud, Network security fundamentals: CIA 
(Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability), Network security in a shared responsibility 
model 
Cloud Network Architecture and Components: Cloud network models (VPC, VNet), 
Subnetting and IP addressing in the cloud, Load balancers and content delivery 
networks (CDNs), Virtual private clouds (VPCs) and security groups Network 
Protocols and Encryption: Transport layer security (TLS/SSL), VPNs and encryption 
for data in transit, Secure tunneling protocols (IPsec), Securing DNS and BGP 
Network Security Controls and Policies: Firewall fundamentals and best practices, 
Intrusion detection and prevention systems (IDS/IPS), Network access control lists 
(NACLs) and security policies, Security groups and network segmentation Secure 
Data Transmission and VPNs: Site-to-site VPNs for hybrid cloud environments, 
Remote access VPNs and secure connectivity, VPN protocols (PPTP, L2TP, 
OpenVPN), VPN client configuration and security considerations Network Monitoring 
and Security Analytics: Network monitoring tools and techniques, Real-time traffic 
analysis and anomaly detection, Logging and alerting for network security incidents, 
Security information and event management (SIEM) integration Cloud Network 
Security Best Practices: Implementing network security policies and procedures, 
Security groups and firewall rule management, Network security automation and 
orchestration, Network security in serverless and containerized environments  

--- PAGE 37 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 341  Case Studies: DDoS mitigation in a cloud-hosted e-commerce platform, Securing 
microservices communication in a cloud-native applications 
 
Unit V: Identity and Access Management (IAM) in the Cloud      6 Lecture Hours 
The role of IAM in cloud security, IAM components and stakeholders, IAM goals and 
principles, IAM trends and challenges 
Authentication and authorization in the cloud, Authorization models (RBAC, ABAC), 
Role-based access control (RBAC), Identity federation and single sign-on (SSO), IAM 
Technologies and Protocols: LDAP and Active Directory, OAuth 2.0 and OpenID 
Connect, SAML (Security Assertion Markup Language), OAuth and API security, Multi-
factor authentication (MFA), IAM Policy and Governance: Creating IAM policies and 
procedures, IAM policy lifecycle management, Policy enforcement and compliance, 
IAM auditing and reporting 
Case Studies:  AWS IAM and Azure AD 
 
Unit VI: Application Security               5 Lecture Hours 
Importance of application security in the cloud, Application security fundamentals, 
OWASP Top Ten and common vulnerabilities 
Secure Coding Practices: Secure coding principles and best practices, Input validation 
and output encoding, Authentication and authorization in cloud applications, Error 
handling and logging for security Data Security in Cloud Applications: Data protection 
and encryption, Handling sensitive data (PII, PHI), Data access controls and role-
based access control (RBAC), Data leakage prevention (DLP) in applications API 
Security: API security considerations and challenges, OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect 
for authentication and authorization, Rate limiting and throttling, Securing API 
endpoints and data transmission Application Security Testing: Static application 
security testing (SAST), Dynamic application security testing (DAST), Interactive 
application security testing (IAST), Continuous integration/continuous deployment 
(CI/CD) pipeline security testing Cloud Application Security Best Practices: Secure 
application development life cycle (SDLC), Security by design in cloud-native 
applications, Web application firewalls (WAFs) and application security policies, 
Secure application deployment strategies 
Case Studies: Securing a SaaS-based customer portal, API security challenges in a 
cloud-native fintech application 
 
Total lecture Hours 45 
 
Textbooks 

--- PAGE 38 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 342  1. Ronald L. Krutz, and Russell Dean Vines, "Cloud Security: A Comprehensive 
Guide to Secure Cloud Computing", Wiley Publishing, 2010. 
2. 
 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme 
Components IA MID SEM End Sem Total 
Weightage (%)  50  20 30 100 
 
Detailed breakup of Internal Assessment 
Internal Assessment 
Component  Weightage in calculation of Internal 
Assessment (100 marks)  
Quiz 1 15% 
Quiz 2 15% 
Class Test 1 15% 
Class Test 2 15% 
Assignment 1/Project 20% 
Assignment 2/Project 20% 
 
  

--- PAGE 39 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 343  Course Code Course name L T P C 
CSVT4119P  Cloud Computing Security and Management Lab 0  0  2  1  
Total Units to be Covered: 12 Total Contact Hours: 30 
Prerequisite(s ): Cloud Computing Architecture and Deployment 
Models Lab and Cloud Application Development Lab  Syllabus version: 1.0  
 
Course Objectives 
1. To empower students to proficiently implement and manage access control 
strategies across various cloud platforms, ensuring data and resource security. 
2. To enable students to effectively design and deploy security measures such as 
attribute-based access control (ABAC), multi-factor authentication (MFA), and role-
based access control (RBAC) to safeguard cloud environments in real-world 
scenarios. 
Course Outcomes 
On completion of this course, the students will be able to 
CO1: Demonstrate the ability to design and deploy secure cloud infrastructures across 
various cloud computing platforms. 
CO2: Evaluate and compare access control mechanisms across various cloud 
computing platforms. 
CO3: Create and manage customer-managed policies in AWS to enforce security and 
compliance standards. 
 
 
CO-PO Mapping 
 
Program 
Outcomes  
Course 
Outcomes                 
CO 1 1 - - 1 2 - - - 1 - - 1 - - 3 
CO 2 1 - - 1 2 - - - 1 - - 1 - - 3 
CO 3 1 - - 1 2 - - - 1 - - 1 - - 3 
Average  1 - - 1 2 - - - 1 - - 1 - - 3 
 
 
1  Weakly Mapped (Low)  2  Moderately Mapped (Medium) 
 

--- PAGE 40 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 344  3  Strongly Mapped (High)                   
 
 
 
List of Experiments 
 
Experiment 1:  Building your first Virtual Private Cloud-AWS  
Experiment 2: Delegate access across AWS accounts using roles-AWS  
Experiment 3: Create a customer managed policy-AWS 
Experiment 4: Use attribute-based access control (ABAC)-AWS  
Experiment 5: Permit users to manage their credentials and MFA settings (AWS) 
Experiment 6 : Implement Azure key vault 
Experiment 7: Manage Access to Azure with Role-Based Access Control  
Experiment 8: Manage Identity and Access- MFA, and Conditional Access (Azure) 
Experiment 9: Manage Identity and Access- Implement Directory Synchronization 
(Azure) 
Experiment 10: Smart Access Control on GCP: Web, programmatic, and command-
line access  
Experiment 11: Write an IAM policy by using client libraries (GCP) 
Experiment 12:  Using AWS WAF to control access to your content (AWS) 
 
Total Lab hours 30  
 
Textbooks 
1. Comprehensive 
 
2. 
 
3.  
 

--- PAGE 41 ---
CONFIDENTIAL | 345  Reference Books 
 
Modes of Evaluation: Quiz/Assignment/ presentation/ extempore/ Written 
Examination 
 
Examination Scheme:  Continuous Assessment 
Components  Quiz & Viva  Performance & Lab Report  
Weightage (%)  50 %  50 %  
 
  

